that is the most widely prescribed drug
in this country and I believe in the US
also. But the list of problems acrewing
from long-term use is beginning to grow
and is serious cancers, dementias. But
the other thing is is that once you're
on it, it's really difficult to come off
it. And that's not all. We use far too
many antibiotics and that's coming a
serious health issue now because the
number of people dying from antibiotic
resistance infections is beginning to
rise dramatically. It's quite
frightening. So, are there alternatives
on this table that I should also
consider as a form of medicine?
>> Oh, yes. And most of these ones I'm
going to be talking about have a pretty
immediate effect. Now, have a bite of
this.
>> Wa. For almost 50 years, Dr. Simon Mills
has pioneered how we think about natural
medicine, earning global recognition as
one of the most respected and
influential herbal practitioners of our
time.
>> These things have medicinal properties.
So, let's start with dark chocolate. In
terms of long-term brain health and
cardiovascular health, it's one of the
best medicines around.
>> Really?
>> Oh, yes. The next one is garlic. And in
some parts of the world, they use garlic
instead of penicellin. In fact, there
was an old trick where if you had enough
garlic, breathe on a petri dish and you
could kill various pathogens just by
your breath.
>> Wow.
>> And then there's this to reduce your
cholesterol levels. This can really help
with your eyesight. This is your blood
flow, gut health, cardiovascular health.
Now, this is one of the ones to watch in
terms of long-term brain health.
Rosemary, we actually did a clinical
trial on this, and all you need to do is
press it and sniff. So, you can see why
some of this stuff already is powerful.
Now, we have more to go through. And
this is where it gets interesting.
There's a lot of people listening who
will want to hear this coffee.
>> Oh god, what do I need to know?
>> So,
I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because a strange way
you are you're part of our history and
you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you
Simon Mills. You are a pioneer by all
accounts in what is called complimentary
medicine, but you're also one of the
most respected herbal practitioners in
the world. You've been doing this for
more than 50 years. I've actually never
spoken to somebody that has a
comprehensive understanding of herbal
remedies and herbal medicine. So, I'm
super excited to have this conversation
with you today. What is the what is the
mission you're on and why do you think
it's important?
I think my main mission is to do what I
can to help people get stronger. I
sometimes say that, you know, the world
is pretty rough out there. I can't do
anything about the sea and the waves,
but I can help you to build a better
boat that can sit better in the water.
And I think people relate to that that
if they were felt a bit stronger in
themselves, they would be able to cope
better with what life throws at them. I
chose plants because people have always
used plants as their primary source of
medicine. People have always grown up
with plants. They've evolved along with
plants. And what I aim to do is to put
the old wisdoms into some scientific
framework and then make it fit with
conventional norms of healthcare.
You were a board member of the British
Herbal Medicine Association. You're the
first chair of the Council for
Complimentary Alternative Medicine
launched in Parliament by former Prime
Minister Alec Douglas Hol. You led a
major European Commission project on
herbal medicine involving over 20
centers across Europe. You're the
secretary of the European Scientific
Cooperative on
>> Phytootherapy.
>> I was not able to say that word
>> which is the which is the polite way of
saying herbs. Okay.
>> So, it's phyto plant therapy.
>> Well, I think when people think about
herbal medicine and using plants as a
form of medicine, they think of tribes
and they think of I don't know sort of
ancient Chinese traditions. And I think
you know the modern westerner thinks of
pills.
>> Yes. when they think of medicine.
>> Yes.
>> What What is it that we've lost? Is
there like a lost wisdom?
>> Yes.
>> And how did that happen? And what what
is it we've lost?
>> When we lived in the countryside, when
we lived close to nature, that was very
much around us. And and in every little
community, there'd be someone, usually a
woman, who would know their way around
the plants and would, you know, help you
out when you had a illness and a
sickness. I'm not saying that there's a
golden age, but when we moved into
cities, we lost a lot apart from
anything else. We were living on top of
each other. We had to drink each other's
water. You know, there was a lot of new
illnesses, sicknesses, pestilences, and
so on that only came in cities. In that
world, the herbs couldn't cut it. So, we
needed stronger stuff. So, they started
using minerals. They started using
things that were poisons.
And the original physician's job was to
be the only guy who could handle
medicines that other people would not be
safe to use. And so you got your
training to use these much more powerful
medicines. And it was thought that the
old plant things were too soft and
gentle and so they were generally
discarded. And then you developed these
medicines into pills because often they
were powders anyway. And you know then
the pharmaceutical industry came in and
branded and and made um proprietary
materials from them. And that drifted a
long way from just going down to a
hedro, going into the garden, going to
the kitchen and picking up remedies.
>> A lot of cultures around the world still
use plants as the first form of
medication for a variety of different
sort of illnesses and diseases. Right.
>> They do. Yes. I mean, most do. I mean,
if you were Inuit and Northern
Territories in Canada and so and Alaska,
you would probably not have very many
plants to choose from, but for most
other people, they surrounded by plants.
That's their world.
>> I think, you know, cuz I'm what, 32
years old, so I've not really grown up
with the wisdom of plants and how they
can be used to treat some of the
illnesses that I have from a very young
age. I'm taking cough syrup and I'm
taking paracetamol when I have a
headache and all these kinds of pills
and medicines, but plants were never a
really a part of that conversation.
>> And I guess that makes me think that
they don't work or
>> that's what most people would now think.
And one of one of the points of this
conversation now is to point you to ways
in which they can and to show you how
you can figure that out within a minute
or an hour. Most of these ones I'm going
to be talking about have a pretty
immediate effect. So it, you know, we
now think, oh, if you take a herb, it
may take months before anything happens.
When I see a patient, my usual request
to them is, can you call me tomorrow to
let me know how it's going because
things happen so fast? And if you're up
for it, you can do a couple of taste
tests and you can see why some of this
stuff really is powerful.
What is it that that you know from the
50 plus years of work that you've done
working with plants as a form of
medicine that the average person on the
street doesn't know
>> how close we are to being to having uh I
I think life is a miracle as I said in
that early encounter um and we can
realize the miracle within us if we just
trust it. I've got a few guys to what I
call health empowerment. Things that you
can do yourself at home just to begin to
understand what's going on in here and
to nourish it. Uh and the plants are the
in my world the one of the most
effective ways of supporting that inner
miracle that we have uh to nourish our
health to empower us.
I I sometimes think that you know
medicine is extraordinary. I mean we now
live with cancer. you used to die with
it. Uh almost all the major illnesses of
the past have now had treatments for but
you know if you've got a chronic
condition you still left with yourself
and you're maybe not feeling so good in
yourself. I sometimes think that a lot
of medicine is a bit like uh fast food
delivery.
You know we have a meal brought in
because it's convenient but that also
desklls us.
you know, we we've stopped learning how
to cook even. You know, I remember going
to New York back in the 80s and
surprised to find that so many
apartments in New York didn't have
kitchens because everyone went out to
eat. And I thought, gosh, you're losing
all those skills of making food and
enjoying it and sitting it down over a
over a table. Um I think medicine, you
know, we use far too many antibiotics.
We use, you know, these um PPI things
called azole for our acid reflux, the
most widely prescribed drug in this
country. And I think USL also mostly
unnecessary. Uh we use a lot of uh
anti-inflammatories just because it's
sore without asking why is it sore and
why are we suppressing one of our body's
main defenses because inflammation is a
defense. So these are things that you
learn as you get into this world that a
lot of what we think are problems are
solutions waiting for support
>> because I think most people would think
that is medicine and
>> that is a food.
>> That's food.
>> Yes. Well, you're right.
>> Medicine food.
>> Yeah, you're quite right. That's
medicine. That's a food. What I'm saying
is that there's a spectrum.
And we may talk about that raspberry
because it's red. And we might talk
about the broccoli because it's green
and there's oranges uh colors there. All
of these colors actually have properties
that are actually quite valuable
properties for our circulatory health,
for our gut health, our brain health. Um
and when the more the science is looking
at it, the more amazing it's looking
these things have medicinal properties.
>> So you're saying that this is medicine
as well?
>> Yes.
Food be thy medicine is what old
hypocrates said
2,000 years ago,
>> 2 and a half thousand years ago.
>> Is it the Chinese that are particularly
big on herbal medicines?
>> Yes. Almost any other anywhere. I mean
there's there's only five countries in
the world that are not big on herbal
medicines and I'll tell you who they are
and you can see if you can draw your own
conclusions. UK is one,
>> US is the second, Canada is the third,
Australia and New Zealand. Now, can you
think of something that combi com binds
them all together? They're originally
white Englishspeaking countries.
>> If you go across to France, the channel
here, go to any pharmacy, most of the
medicine stocks on the pharmacy are
herbal. If you go to some parts of
Germany, you have to sit a herbal exam
to get your license. And further east in
the old Soviet uh block where they
couldn't afford the pharmaceutical
industry, they had homegrown primarily
plant-based medicines much more widely
going to Asia. It's the majority by far
and doctors and people working with
plants and acupuncture in China work
together without thinking about it. And
many doctors use plants in their med as
their medicines.
>> Yeah. How different, cuz I've never
really spent a significant amount of
time in China. How different is the
perception of herbal medicines there
than it is out on the streets of London?
>> They don't think twice about it. It's
what they grow up with. Um they like a
lot of people, we would say regretfully,
do seem to want to do more things like
the west does. Um so they'd adopt more
western habits and as soon as you earn a
bit of money you tend to adopt more
western lifestyles and think that the
herbal thing is for your parents and
grandparents. So there's still that
trend even in Asia um but they start
from a much broader base of experience.
>> Why why should anyone care? You know I
have ibuprofen at home. I have medicine
that I can have in the the cupboard. I
have, you know, cough syrups if I get
sick. If I get the flu, I have some flu
pills that I brought from the pharmacy.
Why should anyone care about what we're
going to talk about today? I suppose the
answer is in my practice. So, I see
patients three sessions a week. And
these are people almost most of them
have been around the block. They've had
treatments for their conditions
sometimes for many years. They're often
living with chronic complex conditions
and they're sore. They're tired. their
energyy's gone. You know, they've been
told that we can't just keep taking the
pills. You know, we've done all the
tests, there's nothing else we can do.
Time and time again, that's when the
cookie crumbles
because then you realize the ibuprofen
and the quick pills ain't doing it
anymore. There's a bigger health need
that needs somehow fixing. And that's
when they come to me as a practitioner
>> and I give them things that they can see
improving their health, their sleep,
their eating, their whatever it is
that's not their energy levels, whatever
it is that's not playing properly. We I
see myself as fine-tuning or upping the
performance. Uh I'm not when someone
comes to me and they say I've got
whatever it is, arthritis or skin
disease or whatever, uh I will politely
take all the notes down. But that's not
what I'm interested in. I'm interested
in where that came from. What is the
misbehavior? What is the poor
performance? Uh that explains why all
this happened. And often you find they
had pneumonia at the age of three or
they had glandular fever at the age of
15 or 16 and things took a turn then and
you can see the trail and often what I'm
doing is going backwards and fixing
things that weren't fixed back a long
time ago working on digestion
particularly because that's where we
work uh kidney function uh liver
function you know circulation
you know up to the brain where we're
dealing in that area. Um, so we're
looking at the performance of the body
and it's only when it doesn't behave
that you notice the need to doing it.
>> How many patients have you seen in your
career, do you think? Thousands of
patients,
>> I would say upwards of 10,000 each for
an hour or so at a time to start with.
So we get deep into the story and then
rolling on at any one time I've got 200
running you know I'm actively treating
and two couple hundred
>> and what are the range of illnesses or
conditions that those patients have had
and when you think about the most
remarkable or most interesting case
studies the most
reliable case studies that you have what
are the conditions that are at the
center of those case studies
>> have you got a medical encyclopedia
anywhere
>> I'm going I'm going to write down the
key ones.
>> No, no. I mean, it's literally I've I
don't know if I've seen everything in
the medical encyclopedia, but I've seen
most things. I mean, literally
everything comes in because mostly is
chronic anyway when they come and see
me. And it can be anything. I mean,
about a quarter of my patients are
living with cancer. So, we that's one
big group. I'm not treating the cancer.
I'm helping them to live better with
whatever it is they're dealing with.
about another
at least a third a bit bit more living
with chronic inflammatory disease,
autoimmune diseases, Crohn's, ulcerative
colitis, psoriasis,
um things that are more complicated than
you can shake a stick at. And again, you
know, we're not dealing with the end
result. We're looking at what may be
leading up to that and seeing if we can
improve underlying functions. But
literally
anything can come by.
>> Is there particular case studies of
patients that you've worked with that
stand out to you that you're most proud
of or that were Eureka moments in your
own sort of journey?
>> Most of my stories are like journeys. So
you see little steps and you you're with
somebody often for a long time and you
just see changes in the way that they um
they change over the weeks and months.
So you know to say I've got an instant
Eureka moment. I' I pulled together a
few stories just you knowing I was going
to come to them and you know just
they're a mly mix and in fact I made
notes because it was sometimes better to
remind myself of the sort of things I
did because each of these patients
will walk out with five or six or eight
different plants and the reason I put
them together is because they have a a
unique story. Um, so probably the one
with the most complex one is someone,
all the names are changed by the way,
someone called Heather who's 65 and she
had a really severe complex condition
called irrima multififor which is a
complex skin disease that's really
distressing, very upsetting.
What we know about it is is that it's
linked possibly to other infections. Um,
so we actually spotted myopplasma
pneumonia is likely implicated. She had
previously had a lot of lung damage um
in her youth. She had early pneumonia
and she was diagnosed with a chronic
obstructive pulmonary thing,
bronchiacasis as it happened. Then she
got CO badly and most of her trouble
started after that.
She also had vitamin B12 deficiency,
pericious anemia we call it, which is a
autoimmune problem. The gut lining stops
the vitamin B12 being absorbed. Those
were in her background story.
the lungs because it was the earliest
and probably the main factor were first
my focus and the second was what was
lining the stomach because most
inflammatory problems start down here.
So I ended up giving her something that
was a combination of remedies for the
gut lining and for the lungs
and
almost within a week or so the itching
of the her skin
subsided. I just happen to think that
was the reason I remember it because
it's it's unusual to get such quick
results in such a complex condition. But
it's a reminder that if you can find the
right button,
then quite big things can happen. I was
lucky to find the right button. And
progressively over the ensuing
few months, the skin problem
disappeared to the extent that she was
my dream patient. She said, "I don't
need your herbs anymore.
That to me is my biggest reward that
they can move on. They don't need help
anymore.
It sticks in your mind because it was a
hugely demanding condition that got
better without and it had been going for
a long time. It had been going three or
four years by the time she saw me. Um,
and it resolved very quickly with what
seemed to be totally irrelevant
treatments. But they there was a
rationale for them. Karen 37 panic
attacks, major anxiety problems.
Heaven knows there's a lot of that about
uh it turns out that um and when she she
was hospitalized when she was 20 with
jaundice which is a liver liver problem.
All the processing all the detox
processes are in the liver. Uh it's the
gateway from the digestion. It handles
emotions. It handles the immune system.
It It's an amazing organ. It's
self-correcting, by the way. So, it
fixes itself very quickly if you give it
the right nudge. She had jaundice. So,
immediately a little bell goes off
because and at a age when that could
mean long-term liver damage, hepatitis.
Uh she's ended up with very little
appetite. uh she feels full easily,
gains weight easily and often feeling
nauseous which is definitely a sign of
liver distress still
menstrual cycles very erratic.
She had early COVID again another big
hammer hammer blow and this that the CO
was before her main symptoms of panic
attacks set in. Uh so I use that as an
example of the way in which what goes on
up here in the brain is linked with what
goes on lower down in the gut.
You know interesting point when we were
living in caves
the best place to be was in the cave
>> cuz outside was dangerous. The only
thing that got you out hunger.
And when we look at the way in which the
cells are
the the machinery inside the cell, we
find that the mechanisms managing
anxiety are the same as the system
managing appetites and and food
processing. So the idea of linking
anxiety with metabolism is basic. This
was an ex exact answer. So the mix of
herbs that I gave her had nothing for
the anxiety at all. It was all to do uh
with metabolism. And so the included
milk thistle, barbar, uh an oriental
herb called bup plurum, artich choke
leaf and an Indian remedy called gynema
which is called sugar destroyer which
which reduces your uh hank hankering for
sweet.
First goal was to manage her sugar
cravings because that seemed to be a key
part of what she was saying. uh and to
improve her liver functions. This was
very quick and she became more settled
over several weeks and months. Then the
next thing that happened was her
menstrual cycles became clearly the
where the trouble was and she was most
likely to be distressed around the
period. So we shifted to include women's
remedies which were then included in the
mix to help manage the the hormonal e
and flow around the menstrual cycle. and
um 3 months, which is the normal time
for cycles to begin to turn, her cycles
began to steady and so did the rest of
her symptoms.
Nothing to do with anxiety, just dealing
with these core functions. So, there's a
couple of examples of, you know, how we
approach things differently.
You know, if Karen had gone to most
other practitioners, she would have had
something for her nerves.
I do really want to talk about you use
the term wi women's herbs.
>> Women's Yeah,
>> women's herbs. I do want to talk about
that and I I do also want to talk about
fertility and the menstrual cycle and
things like PCOS because I'm super
interested in that which might surprise
some people. But obviously there's women
in my life that struggle with those
things. So I do want to get on to that.
I think a second ago you pointed at the
stomach when you said that we treat down
here.
>> Yes.
>> Is that really the place to start to
understand?
>> Well, it's place to start plants cuz
that's where you that's where they go.
So tell me why what do I need to know
about
>> this region the stomach the gut?
>> Wow.
>> In order to have a sort of foundational
knowledge so that we can then start
talking about ibuprofen painkillers
fevers all these kinds of things.
>> Well very simply we think
>> our intelligence is up here.
>> You know we got a brain.
>> Yeah.
>> As soon as you swallow something until
it comes out the other end. We have no
control over what goes on down there.
decisions are being made as the food
traverses down the tube and it's a long
tube. It's about 20 feet of small
intestine that has to go around and then
like another 2 or 3 ft of large
intestine. It used to take about 18
hours to go through and we now because
we sit and drew it take longer. But all
that time intelligent decisions are
being made by the digestive system. what
to do with this, what to do with that.
And the lining of the gut is full of
sensors,
receptors we call them, that are picking
up chemical cues
and responding. So, as the food changes,
this is digested. As the bile from the
liver comes in, it's picking off these
signaling devices and switching on a
whole series of metabolic hormonal all
sorts of other functions. All controlled
major choreography going on here, you
know, without us even knowing about it.
And then just when you thought this was
wonderful, you had something called the
microbiome.
Now when I was at school and it was a
long time ago when I was doing medical
sciences, oh yeah, there was there's the
bowel flora and they help with
digestion, vitamin K, one or two other
things, you know, they might be quite
useful. Now
the microbiome runs the show and it's
it's huge. You know, we thought we knew
what the kidney did. We thought we knew
what the heart did. We thought we knew
what the brain did. We know they only do
it because they work with the
microbiome. It's it's running a show.
And the microbiome is the the billions
of bugs in our gut.
>> You've got more of those little critters
than we have of our own cells. So much
more. So they are huge. They got about
100 times as much genetic capacity as we
do.
>> We've got more bugs in our gut than
cells.
>> Yes.
>> So we're basically
>> we're we're walking gut bags. Yes.
>> We're walking bacteria.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. There's there's more bacteria than
there are us. I mean this is it's a bit
of a gobsmacking thought and you know
obviously people want no no I mean the
bugs will keep them there one of the big
issues of the day are antibiotics
which we know are becoming a serious
health issue now you know the world
health organization and others say very
seriously that antibiotic resistance you
know antimicrobial resistance as they
call it is the biggest threat we have
soon going into a hospital and getting
an operation will be a real risk Because
hospital-b born infections are
increasingly resistant to antibiotics.
You know, we we're piling them in to us,
but also to the animals that we grow. Uh
a lot of them are full of antibiotics.
And that means that the diversity
of the microbiome
is is being reduced. We've losing we
call biodiversity. There's a
biodiversity issue in here. But even
with the diminished um flora that we
have, they still pretty much run the
show. And a lot of the fruits and
vegetables, particularly the ones with
colors in them, actually feed those guys
down there and help them to perform
better. And one good reason to, as we
say, eat the rainbow, just get those
colors in. But yes, I mean, as you can
see, if I start talking about the gut,
I'm not going to stop for the next
month.
On that point of antibiotics, they the
mechanism is that they kind of kill
bacteria, right? So they're killing good
bacteria as well in the process. Often
>> they have different range depending on
the antibiotic, but yes, they will be
cutting a sway through your gut flora
for sure, some more than others. I mean
the point about antibiotics and we we
did a big project with this ironically
just before co uh when I was working
with pucker that uh tea people we put a
campaign together to find natural
approaches to managing
antibiotics or reduce the use of them.
Antibiotics are useless for anything
viral. They don't do anything for a
virus. But unfortunately people with
viral problems will still be given
antibiotics mainly by a harassed doctor
who just you know because they say give
me something doc you know for viruses
mostly you just have to wait for the
body to get rid of it but giving an
antibiotic is actually of no use at all.
Don't take my word for it. Everyone
knows this and you get NHS you know in
this country um posters saying
antibiotics are no good for viruses.
Please don't ask your doctor for them.
So for many of these things, coals and
respiratory problems for example, there
are many spices, I mean some of the
things on that plate there are
particularly good for coals and viruses
up here. And so we put that all together
in the package and said we can encourage
people not to ask the doc for an
antibiotic and use some of these home
easy free or sometimes uh treatments um
to um uh to to uh use instead of the
antibiotics.
>> When you say antibiotics are the most
urgent health issue of the moment. Um, I
want to fully understand why you think
it's so so urgent because we're going to
develop a resistance which means that
we're more susceptible to disease.
>> It's already happening and it's not me
that's saying this is these are the guys
who look after our health care for us
like the double the World Health
Organization who are really getting
close to panic about this issue uh
because already the number of people
dying from antibiotic resistance
infections is beginning to rise.
dramatically.
And new antibiotics, unfortunately,
there's less financial incentive to
develop them because they're often
handed out free by in various countries.
So, you don't get the margins back and
uh the the uh pipeline of new
antibiotics is not good. Uh so, all you
need to do is check on the World Health
Organization to get the chapter and
verse on that. It's it it's it's
actually quite frightening.
I'm on the World Health Organization
site now and um I found a definition of
antibiotic resistance. It's when
bacteria stops responding to antibiotics
and is mainly caused by overusing or
misusing antibiotics. In 2022, US
doctors gave out about 236
million anti [__] it. What?
US doctors gave out 236 million
antibiotic prescriptions.
roughly seven prescriptions for every 10
people. Studies show that at least
roughly 30% of antibiotic prescriptions
in the US aren't needed, especially in
places like doctor's offices and
emergency rooms. In 2020, about 30
million antibiotic prescriptions were
given out in the UK. Children aged 0 to
14 made up 3.6 million of those. And in
2023, the World Health Organization
declared antibiotic resistance one of
the top global health threats and
estimated that it is responsible for
1.27 million global deaths in 2019 and
and contributed to almost 5 million
deaths.
>> That was 2019. I can tell you uh that
the figures have risen dramatically
since then.
So that's what people think you know and
just on a personal basis you know you go
and you need an operation
and you know that that's going to
involve exposure to hospital infections
which is one of the most serious of the
ones in the average hospital you know
it's there some of the most lethal ones
there um increasingly that is going to
be a risk
that you get something that you can't
treat. You're not saying don't take
antibiotics.
>> No, I'm saying take them carefully.
Um, use them when you need them and not
otherwise. And I'm again, it's not me
saying this is most responsible doctors
would wish that their patients wouldn't
keep asking for them.
H
so there's sort of three things that
I've I've been able to ascertain as
risks of misuse or overuse or
inappropriate use of antibiotics which
is the impact on the gut microbiome. Um
the you're contributing to the rise in
antibiotic resistance and
>> those are the main things
>> I guess even with the diseases you get
you'll be slower to heal because you're
less if you've got that resistance. That
is one of the things that we do see
particularly those who are long-term ill
you know that they lose some of the
healing capacity and that's so much of
the work I do is to aim to put some of
that right
>> and there's links to colaractyl cancers
>> yeah according
>> well that's because we're talking about
the microbiome you see so those are the
cancers in the lower gut and we know
that the microbiome is a major factor in
how well the gut is so things like
Crohn's and ulcerative colitis and
cancer of the bowel very closely linked
to the state of the microbiome.
>> Okay. So, are there alternatives on this
table or in the world of plants to
antibiotics that I should maybe also
consider um instead of just jumping
straight to antibiotics for everything
that I experience?
>> Yes, if you got a serious gut or other
infection, you may need the antibiotics.
So, let's put that straight away. But if
you've got a cold, flu, virus, repres a
viral problem, particularly the airways,
you a antibiotics will have no use at
all and b as we just said, they just add
to the risk of more because every time
you take an antibiotic, you're growing a
small population of that of of the
species of bacteria that's affected who
are resistant to that. It's natural
selection, you know. So you have a
thousand little bacteria, that's a small
amount by their terms, and you kill 90
999 of them. The one that survives will
then become two in 20 minutes and four
in 40 minutes and suddenly become a new
population. And you know, I I I duck
that bullet. And so that group of
bacteria will already be resistant. So
we're creating resistance every time we
use an antibiotic. So try let's try then
doing something else shall we? So let's
say you've got a cold.
You're feeling the cold. It's got a good
name by the way. So cold is one of the
things you feel when you've got a cold.
And that's interesting because in former
times we didn't have tests. We didn't
have laboratories. We didn't have
paramedics. We didn't have people poking
things in you. All we could know is what
it felt like. And when you've got a
cold, you often feel cold
and you feel chills and you want to wrap
up and you want hot water or you want to
have a hot bath. All that in the old
language meant that you were cold and
what you needed to do was to heat up.
Now you take
this fella. This is ginger.
It's grown widely around the world. in
its original Asian form. It was made
extinct around the time of the Romans.
So popular was it and ever since all the
ginger sense of this species uh has got
going from rootstock because it no
longer seeds itself. So this has been
the most valuable natural commodity ever
in its dried form worth more than its
weight in gold. And you know the reason
why all those Europeans ended up in Asia
running India and South the Dutch and
the Indonesia and so on is because
that's where these things came from.
That's where the spices came from. And
so we decided you know like good
capitalists to go and u control the
business. So ginger became very popular
over here because we don't have nothing
like it over here. The nearest thing we
got is horseradish which I promise you
is no substitute for this. So, how do we
use this? We got a knob of ginger here
about the size of your thumb. That's
about a good dose. You grate it, fresh
ginger into a a a mug.
>> Can you do that for me?
>> We got a great I've got a grater for
you.
>> So, um we've got here a piece of ginger
the as I say about the size of your
thumb. The thumb's a good measure
because it's your measure. So, if you're
a small person, you'll have a small
thumb, but I'm a bigger person. So, I'm
going to use And you literally, it's
making a bit of a mess here, but you're
doing this at home, you don't mind a bit
of mess. So, you're literally grating
grace nicely, doesn't it? Into a mug.
And let's say that was the whole thumb.
I don't want to take up too much time on
this. And then
the one thing that works brilliantly
with ginger is cinnamon.
Now, this is cinnamon you buy in any
shop. It comes in different forms.
There's one from China called Cassia,
which looks like one big curled bark.
>> Yeah.
>> If you look at this one, you'll see that
it's tightly wrapped with lots of little
curl, lots of little filaments in it.
That's the one you go for. It's got it's
more aromatic.
>> And you either grate that with, if you
got a spice mill, or
>> you take a teaspoon of it. Um, let's say
that's a teaspoon full. And you put that
in your
mug.
>> So that's ginger and cinnamon.
>> Ginger and cinnamon. That's it.
Then you add your hot water
that there.
>> You're going for real one, right?
>> Going for the real one.
>> Good on you. Uh, at this point, a civ is
useful.
>> Why? What for? cuz it's going to be it's
full of
>> oh bits
>> bits
and then let's say this is this is a
nice Japanese green tea mug but let's
say this is your mug and we'll pour a
little bit
in there. You see all the stuff that you
leave behind.
>> Oh yeah. Okay.
And if you don't mind sharing a mug.
>> So, what's in here? This is
>> just ginger and cinnamon.
>> Just ginger and cinnamon.
>> It's It's fairly weak.
>> Oh, it is nice, though.
>> It's nice, isn't it?
>> It is nice.
>> Now, can you feel it warming already?
>> Yes. Straight away.
>> It's really nice.
>> Yeah. Now you see what what's happening
there is that you
I mean ginger is an is an example of a
group of remedies which includes
turmeric by the way and that's other
root the other root there that's
turmeric
>> um which normally you see in a yellow
powder we might talk about that later
>> and black pepper and chilies we got a
chili here
which when you take them
you think you're burning your mouth
don't
The interesting thing is that
there's no burning.
You can actually have full madras level
uh chili and no harm will be done to
your lining because there's no burning
going on. What you're doing is you're
stimulating the pain fibers.
So you got pain fibers all the way
through the lining
>> of the mouth. When you take a hot thing
like ginger,
it's stimulating the pain fibers and
immediately there's a what we call a
reflex response which opens up the blood
vessels. It's called hyperemia. More
blood and the vessels lining these
mucosa, the ones that you just swallowed
and including a little bit up in the
nasal passages are opening up. the mucus
cells producing mucus will loosen up and
you get more runny mucus which is
helping to flush through the uh the grot
on the mucosa and the main thing you
feel is the warmth.
>> Mhm.
>> And if you're dealing with something
down here in the lungs, you'll actually
start bringing up more gunk up the
airways. It's there's a natural
escalator that we use to that the body
uses to get stuff out of the lungs that
stimulated And the mixture of cinnamon
and ginger was created I think in
heaven. I mean I think that it's such a
natural compliment and anybody can do
that.
And the point about it is that it's
warming and in the old days that was the
key thing. You would didn't matter if
you had a headache or a joint pain or a
menstrual cramp. If you wanted to put a
hot water bottle on it or heat it up,
then that was a cold problem
and putting a heating medicine would
begin to make the difference. So, you
can use the same thing if you have a
headache and you want to put a hot pack
on it. If you got a menstrual cramp and
you want to put a hot water bottle on
it, if you got a joint pain and you want
to put a a heating
linament on it, you can use the same
thing. ginger
>> just because it's heating
>> and that's simple old medicine.
>> So, so when you're experiencing
different types of pain or a cold then
cinnamon and ginger are a good I think
my
>> well only if it responds to heat. Now,
if you want to put an ice pack on, I
mean the old doctors when someone came
with a migraine would say, "Tell me,
would you prefer a hot packer or an ice
pack
>> for your migraine?" And migraine
sufferers generally split 7030
preferring heat to 70, but a third of
people with migraines actually want a
cold pack. You don't use ginger for
that. You use cooling remedies, which we
might come on to later.
>> Okay. My girlfriend, she drinks ginger
tea all the time, almost every day.
>> Yeah, she likes the heat.
>> She likes the heat.
>> Yeah,
>> she she drinks it before bed as well.
>> Can help with sleep if that's the way it
goes. I mean, everyone people are
different and there are some people who
can't take ginger at all because their
stomach objects
um or because it, you know, literally
heats them up too much. They get
stimulated by it. Um, but that's where
the individuality comes in.
>> Okay. So, any any condition where I
might be looking for heat, ginger and
cinnamon,
>> the first place to go.
>> First place to go.
>> Yeah, you could, if you wanted to be
Texmex, you can take the chilies. Um,
you know, well, you know, that's a we
think of them as a much more extreme
version of the heating. and you know
remind ourselves it was only when the
Europeans discovered Americas that
chilies became used over here. You know,
can you imagine an Italian meal without,
you know, without tomatoes and chilies?
But in the old days there were none of
those because they all came from
America. Um but yeah, chilies were the
American equivalent of ginger used for
the same purpose.
So if someone comes to you and they say,
"Simon, when shall I use chilies as a
form of medication?" What what would you
say?
>> First of all, I don't know yet.
>> And you know, if I'm dealing with
someone at a distance, you know, online
or on the phone or something, and they
say, you know, what should I try? I
said, the first thing to do is you
figure it out. You can start with herbal
teas.
You are, are you? I'm going to drop it
into the I'm going to drop it into here.
Is that a bad idea?
>> Yeah. Yeah. No, go for it. But you'll
you'll you should notice that's should
be quite a hot one. Uh I will ask
suggest that they start with herbal teas
because herbal teas are a very low dose.
>> Mhm. But they'll allow you to figure out
what suits you. And you can divide, as I
hinting at earlier, old medicines were
often divided into those that were more
warming, that we would now call
stimulating circulation, and more
cooling, which we would now translate as
stimulating digestion.
And depending on which of those you
prefer would really give me a clue. So
if you were looking at warming remedies,
it could be ginger tea, it could be
fennel tea, you know, that's a warming
remedy. Or it could be cinnamon or um
any of the spices. Cardamon is one of my
favorites, by the way. Um this is I use
cardamon. This is the cardamon pods
inside a little black seeds.
Absolutely lovely taste. Do you know
him? Do you know cardamon? Have you
tried it?
>> Not really. No.
>> Oh, have a bite of that.
>> Just bite the seed.
>> Yeah, just bite into it. You don't just
just get a hint of the taste.
In many parts of the Middle East,
cardamon is one of the main flavors.
Things like coffee and so on.
>> Reminds me of um Oh, I was going to say
Indian food that I've had.
>> Yes. Used a lot in India.
>> And in China, it's a convolescent tonic.
So, they use it when people building up
their digestion after being ill for a
long time. They will often use cardamon.
It's one of my favorite remedies for
that. when people really run low, their
digestion isn't functioning. It was
appeared in one or two of these stories
I've got here because I prefer that to
most of the other spices when I need
warming, as I said before, but also
sustaining and nourishing.
So, you ask them, do you prefer teas
that are warming or would you like
something more cooling? You know, one of
the most cooling remedies that people
know about is this, which is mint.
>> That's spearmint. The best one is
peppermint.
>> It's got a lovely smell, hasn't it?
>> Yeah.
>> That has always been thought of as
cooling.
And it's a simple test. Would you prefer
ginger or peppermint tea? And already
you're beginning to narrow things down a
bit.
>> Mhm. The main cooling remedies
throughout history from you know the
very beginning and in every part of the
world you'll find them saying exactly
the same thing. The main cooling
remedies so-called are the bitters
and they taste really bitter.
>> When you say cooling you mean I feel hot
so I want something to cool me down.
>> That's right.
>> And there's certain conditions where I
will feel I'll feel hot.
>> Fever. fever fever
>> and they were often used to fever manage
fever
>> and u what h you remember when we were
young we were told if you've had a big
meal don't go swimming
>> you weren't told that
>> I can't swim so
>> there you go if that was one of the
things that you know some of us in my
generation at least were always
remembered we were told you know if you
got a big meal it's not a good idea to
go swim because you the blood's moving
into the digestion and you won't get
nearly as much as you want where you
need it in the limbs. Uh and that's you
know it is true when you are digesting a
lot of blood investment shall we call it
is going into the digestive system
because there's a lot of work needed to
break down this food turn it into
something useful it is an investment you
put a lot in get much more out but what
it means is is that um
uh digestion is all about I'm just being
a bit loose here with the language but
it's not about language it's like
bringing blood into the core
when you got a fever,
the blood's all charging around and your
body temperature is going up, which is
great because fever actually is a
defense measure. You know, when our body
temperature rises by a couple of
degrees, are the white blood cells, the
ones that are doing the leg work two or
three times as active. So, fever is what
the body uses when it needs to bring out
the big guys, bring out the fight.
There's a slight design problem. It was
almost as though you know the creator
put a you know a purposeful fault in the
system because a lot of fever comes from
the gut you know they get gut infections
you know that's one of the main places
and at that moment all the blood's going
out here and you want more of it going
in more digestion if you like. So when
you take a bitter,
when you're taking a bitter, you're
actually triggering taste buds up here.
>> A bitter
>> a bitter something that tastes bitter.
>> Is are there any plants that are bitter?
>> Yeah, a bitter plants are very common
and were highly valued in the old world.
Um, in our times, probably the most
bitter plant that people used in
European terms was something called
wormwood.
Now you may not be familiar with that
word but the French for wormwood is
vermouth
and you think of the use of a drink
before a meal.
>> The idea was it was they used to call it
an apperitif something that stimulated
your appetite.
>> So they would use bitters to improve
your appetite and a low level of
wormwood would be one of them. Dandelion
and boerdo of two other bitters which we
now have as a soft drink you know
>> particularly in America
>> and we know that bitters do switch on
the appetite so we sometimes use them
when appetite is poor
>> and you know there's all sorts of
reasons why you got a low appetite but
bitters can really help particular if
you're recovering from an illness um
they can help with um getting the dig
digestion juices flowing and the
appetite up
>> because they bring blood to the
digestive system.
>> Well, they do all sorts of things
actually. When you switch on these
receptors in the mouth, these taste
buds, they hardwired and they produce
hormones down here in the stomach that
switch on all sorts of things and
effectively increase digestive activity
which involves more blood coming into
the area. So, yes,
let's imagine you're living in some part
of, you know, the the desert area in the
Middle East. you know, you're eating a
sheep or something that hasn't seen a
refrigerator and it's a bit dodgy, you
know, and you think after a meal, you
turn to something
easily available in that part of the
world. It's a plant called cafe arabica,
we call it coffee. You ground the coffee
into a sludge at the bottom, pour a bit
of hot water, and drink that straight.
That's a bitter. So if you ever had an
espresso without sugar, that's a bitter.
>> Okay? And that was used as a digestive.
In other words, after you're eating, it
would help cope with some pretty rough
food. So bitters were always seen to be
good for your digestion and appetite.
And in fever, that actually meant
lowering your body temperature. And
that's we can see that happening. you
know it it means that you some of the
anger out here just gets
sublanimated into digestion. So that was
where the bitters got their cooling
reputation. And we can now laugh at this
is all medieval nonsense. But the point
that I keep coming back to when I'm
seeing patients, I start with that blank
sheet of paper
is because the only test of what these
do to you is to take it. And as you
notice with your ginger and cinnamon,
you don't need long.
>> You've got it there straight up. And you
know if I give a bitter to somebody uh
and you know someone is really bitter
they will know within an hour or so what
effect it's having.
If you're starting a business that means
you're one person doing the workload of
probably about 50 people. When I first
founded this podcast I had no idea that
I was about to step into a hundred
different roles that I'd never trained
for. Things like researching and
production and scheduling and branding
all of it all at once. And this
experience isn't unique to me, but for
millions of founders around the world,
the tool that changes all of that is our
sponsor, Shopify. Shopify now powers 10%
of all US e-commerce from names like Gym
Shark and Mattel to firsttime founders
just getting started. It's like having
your very own design studio, content
creator, and marketing team in one with
hundreds of online store templates, AI
tools to create product pages, and easy
to launch email and social media
plugins. Behind the scenes, Shopify
manages your inventory, international
shipping, and even your returns. So, if
you're ready to sell, sign up for your
$1 a month trial at shopify.com/bartlet.
That's shopify.com/bartlet.
$1 a month. No way.
On this point of antibiotics, um I've
heard you talk about vitamin D, vitamin
C, and zinc
>> as a potential alternative to jumping
straight from
>> not not straight alternative, but in
improving your natural resistance
particularly to viruses and such like.
>> Okay. Um then there is evidence for both
vitamin D and vitamin C but also zinc as
backups in ter in sub form supplement
form uh that do seem to add to your
resilience in the face of infections.
>> I'm quite concerned because you know I'm
a I've got dark skin and uh in the
weather that we live in here in the UK
when I am in the UK I worry that I won't
get enough vitamin D. Are these quote
unquote supplements important do you
think? What are the supplements that you
think are imperative?
>> None.
>> Not for mo for everybody, but there are
certain situations. I think vitamin D is
a good one. And it's not just people
with dark skin that have a vitamin D
deficiency is pretty widespread in in
darker countries if we can call our
weather and that um we know where
there's not enough sun. uh vitamin D
deficiency is quite widespread and
increasingly doctors do suggest you have
vitamin D supplementation through the
winter particularly
even just having a 15-minute outdoors
with the sun will give you a fairly
hefty amount.
>> Do you supplement?
>> Not myself.
No, I don't. I I don't haven't spotted a
need. Uh but that doesn't mean that I
don't recommend supplements to people.
Well, there is a need.
and garlic. We've got garlic there that
has a antibiotic role. Well, this is
yeah garlic uh what used to be called
Russian penicellin and when after
penicellin was invented they because
some parts of the world they use garlic
instead of
penicellin which was hard to come by
originally and it was used in places
like the first world war to avoid some
of the French foot and other problems
that soldiers would get in those lousy
conditions. Garlic, when talking raw
now, is a very powerful prebiotic. In
other words, it helps the gut flora, the
good guys down here in the microbiome.
And there's evidence to show a lot of
these other ones do as well, but garlic
is particularly strong. And uh when I'm
dealing with a disrupted gut flora, a
microbiome, I will sometimes refer to
raw garlic as a treatment.
But you need to do it with a little care
because you know you don't want to lose
too many friends.
>> Why what's wrong with g is it
>> is the aroma you give out afterwards. So
you know your your friends will be very
polite but they'll rather wish you
hadn't. Um and some people find that it
does upset you know when they swallow.
But I have a little trick which I call
the garlic intensive which is when
everything is down the gut is in the
state you maybe got a lung infection or
whatever and there's a lot of need for
if you like an antibiotic type of
treatment
raw garlic what you do is and for all
sorts of reasons the Friday evening is
the best time to do this because you got
the weekend ahead of you. You take one
of those cloves.
It will first of all on that day you
haven't eaten so much. So you don't have
so much on the way. Then you take one of
these cloves, you peel it, chop it up
small pieces and swallow it with water.
You don't chew it. Just chop it up and
swallow with a little bit of water
and wait for half an hour just to make
sure that that's okay. Your stomach's
okay to go ahead. If it is, take another
clove,
chop it up, swallow it. Another half
hour later, take another clove. And if
you start at 6:00, by 10:00 in the
evening, you've got eight cloves inside
you.
>> Eight.
>> And And what's that going to do?
>> Well, that's the point. You You usually
go to bed, and I would suggest you go to
bed alone at this point because you're
not very friendly at this point because
you're oozing garlic. The aroma of
garlic is coming out of all your pores.
Incidentally, it's also coming out of
your lungs. And you know, there was an
old trick where you used to be able to,
if you had enough garlic, breathe on a
petri dish in a laboratory with various
pathogens and you could kill them just
with your breath. You know, it's the oil
of garlic is a powerful antiseptic.
But what it's doing in the lower
digestion is it seems the good guys down
there quite like it, but the bad guys,
you know, in the old days we had garlic
was, you know, against the devil and it
looks as though the bad guys down there
don't like garlic. So just doing that
over a weekend can make a big difference
to your good the good guys in the
microbiome. And if you got a low-level
gut or lung infection, that can be
really helpful. But that's, you know,
something you can do at home, but you
don't want to do that too often. In
fact, I would suggest that one garlic
intensive is probably enough for most
people.
>> So, prebiotic effects. It has an anti-
microbial properties
um which are is it good for pain? Called
it Russian penicellin. Is it?
>> Yeah. Well, it depends where the pain's
coming from. Um, but if your pain is a
cough or a chest infection, yes,
particularly particularly good for chest
infections. Some people do use it for
arthritic problems. Uh, it will depend
on what's causing the arthritis. I, you
know, and I, it's very hard for me to
say
one of these things will do it for
everybody. It won't. It will do for in
certain situations. And what we learn
when we're dealing with plants is that
you're the you're the boss. You find out
for yourself. All people like me do is
say, "Well, give this a try. This is
worth trying. This is valuable. Why
don't you give it a go?"
>> How do you think about chronic pain?
There's so many people living with a
variety of different types of chronic
pain. It affects 51.6 million people, I
believe, just in the US alone.
>> And the most common forms of chronic
pain are conditions such as arthritis or
migraines or lower back pain or other
types of nerve damage. Roughly 75 to 85%
of Americans will experience some form
of back pain during their lives. When I
think about this big array of plants
that are in front of me and other
plants, what is what is the first place
to go in your mind if you're dealing
with chronic pain?
>> It depends again where it is. But let's
take joints and back. Um you know where
you've got a joint that's causing and
it's because it's inflamed.
>> Yeah. So when you have inflammation, you
add itis to the name of the plant. So
this is arthritis because it's the
inflammation of the the joint. Um you
you have cyitis which is the bladder.
You have bronchitis if it's the lungs,
gastritis if it's the stomach. So itis
tells us there's an inflammation and
mostly with arthritis is an
inflammation.
And briefly, it's because there's junk
being dumped on the joint. The joints
have got very poor circulation by design
because, you know, this surfaces being
pressed against each other. And so the
tissue in the joint is cartilage,
gristle in in if you're eating it. Um,
which is designed to survive with very
poor circulation because you know when
you've got two things pressing in,
there's not much room for blood than
there.
So if there is metabolic waste, let's
call it junk in the system, it's more
likely to come out in these places where
there's poor circulation. Sometimes
things is a bit like a U bend under a
basin. You know, if there's any stuff in
the sink, it's going to come deposit
there. So I think of joints as a bit
like a U bend.
So the first thing that people did with
a joint pain and inflammation of the
joint was to help to clean the joint,
bring more blood into the area. And
that's what the inflammation is doing.
It's hurts like Billy Ho. But what it's
doing is bringing more blood in by brute
force to do what I was just saying. But
if you were to put on a mustard plaster
or a Cayenne plaster,
>> a Cayenne pepper plaster
>> which you simply put on on the X
outside.
>> Mhm.
>> And you can buy these inarmacies and so
on. It's called capsicum. Okay. So
capsent pig button. Um it's a standard
prescription
dressing for a pain. What it does is it
brings the blood in directly
and that means the inflammation doesn't
have to do it and the inflammation is
sore. What you're doing isn't. So by
definition you're reducing the pain
level.
>> Mhm.
>> That's an example of using plants in a
creative way which people always did.
>> They they used to do that back in the
day.
>> Oh yes. Yeah. I mean, if you go to North
America, the native populations would
regularly use Cayenne as their salve for
bad joints. In Europe, it was mostly
mustard. Um, we're talking the yellow
mustard, the one that's strong, used as
a plaster over a joint. And if you've
got arthritis in your fingers, and this
is something anyone can do with, you
know, suffering the pain here, use a
mustard bath. put your fingers into a
dilute warm solution of mustard and it's
amazing how quickly they ease up or you
could put a plaster on the hip or
whatever. Um people always did this.
>> Have you seen this work in your
practice?
>> Oh yes. And I often recommend it to
patients and they keep reporting back.
It's really makes a difference.
I think I worry about lower back pain
because I spend so long sitting down and
>> I've got low back pain too.
>> And I didn't use herbs very much for
that.
>> What did you do? Well, it was a long
story, but there was a very good uh West
African combo called OCBSA, which I saw
back in the day when I had really bad
back and I got the music got so into me
that I loosened up and began to jive and
dance around and realize that my back
had gone and it stayed gone for decades.
It's just unlocked a knot. So, that
wasn't any herb. That wasn't any plant.
>> Dancing. dancing. I mean, letting the
music get into you.
>> What's the difference?
>> Well, you know, when you feel the music
running through you, you know, you're
just moving in with the beat, you know,
>> that loosens up a lot of knots. You
know, I don't just do plants. I, you
know, I talk about breathing. I talk
about exercises that you can do for
yourself. And uh sometimes when you got
a joint pain, it's all about it's locked
and you can find ways of
loosening
that joint.
>> Ibuprofen.
>> Yes,
>> people reach for this all the time. I
mean, I was looking at some of the
search trend data for ibuprofen and it
is absolutely exploding.
>> Yes.
>> Um that's the the search graph
ibuprofen. Yeah.
>> Um
>> it is but is one of the most widely used
drugs in this country. M um it's
obviously because it works and it's
based on um a plant substance called
salic salicylic acid um which gave us
aspirin
and we still use the basic molecule to
create the what we call nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs or nsaides and
ibuprofen is one of the most widely used
of those and basically they cut the
inflammatory
process
just cut it and so the inflammation just
diminishes which is good right
>> well if it gets rid of the pain it is
but there's a always a follow up
question why was that inflammation
necessary because inflammation is a
defense it's one of my most powerful
defenses we have in the body
and whenever someone is saying I'm on I
need ibuprofen My next question is what
can we do to reduce the need for the
inflammation? So when I was talking
about the arthritis I was saying this
junk shall we say being dumped on the
joint can we help to relieve that? Can
we go upstream and reduce some of the
metabolic strain? You know people eat
sometimes the wrong food and sometimes
increases arthritis. Uh you can improve
your arthritis by have switching to more
plants very often. Um but there are
other things that we can give that seem
to help reduce some of those pressures.
But the pain might be somewhere else. It
might be linked to a full-blown disease,
you know, and in that case, you know,
using anti-inflammatories is the only
thing you can do. But if there is a way
in which we can help reduce the need for
that inflammation in the first place, I
would much prefer to do that than just
suppress a natural defense. We we tend
to think of inflammation as the enemy.
>> We do. And I think we're wrong.
>> We think of it as the disease itself.
>> We are wrong. It's the consequence of a
problem. And it's inflammation itself is
a healthy response. It's when we bring
out, you know, I sometimes use military
language here. And there's a bunch of
white blood cells that I liken to
Marines. You know, these these are guys
who when they're working well, they just
go in and do the job. They don't sort of
figure it out. They don't ask questions.
They just go and do the job. We got a
whole bunch of white blood cells that
are bit like that. They just we call
neutrfils. There's various others of
that group and they just go in and whack
them.
Inflammation is bringing those guys out
faster and harder. So, we're bringing in
more of the marines if you like to
finish the job. What's wrong with that?
You know, that's what we want to do. It
happens to be sore.
Then
if they don't do the job and the junk or
the problem keeps piling in, then the
marines become the problem and then we
use the ibuprofen to shut them up. But
as I said, there's always a question,
you know, why are we what's what's the
consequence of stopping this internal
cleansing process that uh is so
important. So inflammation is not the
enemy. Inflammation is the defense
measure that can sometimes overstay its
welcome. I had an injury in my ankle a
couple of couple of months back because
I I pulled some some of the ligaments
down there and my ankle was swelled up
and I was getting conflicting
information from people about the
inflammation because I had this big
football game coming up this for this
charity match called soccerate at Old
Trafford and I had one of my physios
telling me to apply the ice thing and
take anti-inflammatories and I had
another one telling me something else
about the inflammation that actually I
didn't want to combat the inflammation
because it was doing its job and so I
it's quite difficult to navigate whether
one should let inflammation stay or if I
should be taking anti-inflammatories or
ibuprofen. Um
>> well if you got a match to you sometimes
need something just to get you match fit
or match acceptable. Um but if it's a
short-term we call it acute inflammation
then overwhelmingly the advice is don't
suppress it because in the short term
you know we get a cut get a bit of dirt
it gets swollen maybe a bit of pus and
so on and after a while it sorts itself
out that's this miracle I called talked
about earlier the body heals itself all
the time that's inflammation doing its
job properly cleaning out the marines go
in clear all the stuff out back to their
barracks
back to normal. That's great. It's only
if, as I said, the junk keeps piling in
and the job doesn't get finished and we
call that chronic inflammation.
That's when you sometimes need a bit of
help.
>> And chronic inflammation is often caused
by something further upstream, right?
>> So, you try and think about what's
causing it upstream.
>> Exactly. So,
>> and what tends to be the perpetrator
upstream?
The gut is where most of these things
begin because when you think about it,
that's where we take most foreign
material. Almost all of it has to be
dealt with by the gut. So that's where
most of our immune system is. You know,
we talk about the immune system, but you
know, the majority of the immune system
is a few millimeters away from the
lining of the gut because that's where
the action is. That's where all the
foreign stuff is. So if there's a
disruption there, it's that's the first
place to begin and because it's usually
the best place to begin. Uh and if we
add the what we talked about the
microbiome as another big factor, then
there's plenty to work be done with down
there. So if it's a chronic
inflammation, I will spend a lot of time
looking at what might be going on down
there.
>> And what's the typical suggestion if it
is a a gut related problem? Well, the
first thing is to do is to u get the
best food you can down there, which is
mostly plant-based. Um, I mean, there
are exceptions to that. Uh, but in if
we're looking at restoring your good
health down here, the gut does seem to
like plants at this point. Um, so we
talk about, you know, having a wide
range of plants. you know the the
current uh advice from one or two people
is that you would aim to have 30
different types of plant per week you
know just to get the diversity because
we don't know which one you need so why
don't give as much difference as you can
and you know there
you know people think you can't afford
to eat healthily all I would suggest is
that you go and travel to somewhere like
India or anywhere in Asia where they eat
pretty much a lot of plants, mostly
plants for pennies. You know, you can
make a healthy meal by if you know how
to cook by just mixing some of these
simple the dahs and the the root
vegetables and the other vegetables
easily mixed together. A few spices in
there absolutely delicious and your gut
and your microbiome will be jumping with
glee.
>> You talk about eating your rainbow.
>> Yes. What does that mean?
>> Means as many colors as you can fit in.
Um, literally because each color is
cause is produced by a constituent of
plants. Many of them we call polyphenols
which we know have a range of effects on
all sorts of
mainly on the microbiome again because
they're all in different ways prebiotic.
They all help good guys prosper down
there. But then after the microbiome is
processed them, which is interesting,
the microbiome is is critical for
processing polyphenols,
they don't get absorbed unless the
microbiome breaks them up already. So
the benefits of the colors depend on the
good guys down here. M
>> when they get into the blood they start
doing all sorts of wonderful things to
the lining of the blood vessels for
example up into the brain where we got a
what we call bloodb brain barrier which
is actually a very exciting interface.
The polyphenols the colors all have
wellestablished mechanisms that improve
the health all around the body. So
simple. If you got a child who used to
say, "Eat your greens." We now say, "Eat
your rainbow. The more different colors,
the better."
>> I wonder if that's why they put so many
artificial dyes in junk food.
>> Well, I wish they wouldn't
>> to try and trick our brains into
thinking it's I don't know.
>> No, there's nothing quite like the
original.
>> In terms of fruit,
>> what are your favorite fruits to sort of
recommend people to eat and why?
probably the the if you wanted to have a
you know a top list the darker the color
the better. So, we talk about purples
and I'm pleased to see that uh your team
has found a purple carrot there
and we remind ourselves that most
vegetables were purple once upon a time.
If you think of maze, you know, in the
the sweet corn and the maze that you
grow in the Americas, that mostly was
originally purple and we bred the purple
out because it didn't look so
appetizing. And we're probably purple
deficient.
Uh I think we could do with more purple
in our lives because the
purple and blue color is a something
called anthocyanins. These are types of
polyphenol and they're particularly
powerful particularly with the blood
supply. And we're talking about things
like eyesight and brain health and
circulatory health, blood pressure
control and all those sort of things can
be improved just by having more purple
in our lives. So we got beetroot.
That'll do. We got the berries. Uh, red
grapes are probably more We got the
Yeah, we got the red grapes here. That's
got more of these than the yellow that
the grapes do. Um, so I would start with
the reds and purples.
>> You said you think we're purple
deficient.
>> Yeah. I mean, just, you know, think of
something interesting to say, but it's
probably something in there.
And in terms of vegetables, what are
your favorite go-to vegetables that that
you'd recommend I eat?
>> Uh, start with the roots. The root
vegetables, the carrots, the beetroots,
the parsnips,
the the various other root vegetables
out there, not all of which are people's
favorites, but they have uh fiber uh
sort of starch in them which is
particularly prebiotic
and some of the most powerful prebiotics
are the root vegetables. So those are
definitely worth having the greens
obviously and broccoli and interestingly
I found a purple one uh which are easily
enough to get. So you know you can get
the purple or the green you know
obviously there's a value in the in the
purple there. Uh but any broccoli, any
of the cabbage family is full of all
sorts of other ingredients uh that have
their own benefits in all sorts of ways,
metabolism, gut, hormonal, blood supply.
So greens, roots, and the big one in
most people's lives are the grains. you
know, wheat for example, but cereals,
lentils, dahl, uh, peas and beans, uh,
all of these have their own benefits,
particularly for the microbiome.
You know, again, I don't know exactly
what even I need, let alone what anyone
else needs. So, the best thing to do is
to have as much diversity as possible.
>> What is your diet? Are you mix a vegan?
Do you eat meat?
>> Yeah. have um you know I just have a
broad range of most humans have eaten
which is a mixture of things. Uh I do
obviously many of my patients are vegans
and they can you can live quite well
with them. You have to add a few extra
things just to cover your back on a few
areas but you can live perfectly well at
least when you're grown up an adult on a
planton diet. Um, but you know, who am I
to say that an Inuit in the Arctic who
never sees any vegetable ever and only
lives on traditionally only lives on
seal and whale meat and blubber is any
less healthy than someone in Thailand
who lives only on rice and vegetables.
You know, we're all we can cope with all
sorts of variety of foods. There isn't
one food for everybody. I think we would
we were discussing before we started
recording that I'm currently on a
ketosis diet. The keto diet.
>> Keto diet. Yes.
>> Which basically means that I'm extremely
low carb in my diet.
>> Yes.
>> Basically consuming no sugar.
>> Um what do you think of the keto diet?
What's been your experience with it?
>> It can be and I think you're one of
those that would get a lot of benefit
from it. um because it I mean sugars are
you know they're in a lot of vegetable
material and of course unfortunately we
have sugar now as an added
>> um to our diets um they tend to slow
down various parts of your metabolism
they tend to make metabolism a bit more
like hard work and so if you take those
out and some of the more sugar producing
carbs then you're freeing up a lot of
energy. So, a lot of people on keto toe
diets find that, you know, they're
sharper. That's probably what you do.
Um, but there are potential downsides.
Interestingly, you know, I mean, the
first thought was, well, that can't be
very good for your microbiome because
they rely on um
vegetable material to a large part. But
when we've looked at the microbiome of
keto d after keto diets, it's not as
it's actually there's some good guys
that reemerge with a keto diet. So, it's
a mixed bag. The only thing is is that
when you don't have as many plants in
your diet, then there's slightly more
strain on things like liver and kidney
function. So, someone who's taking keto
for a long term, it's always a good idea
to check that they're okay. And some of
the more long-term concerns have been
around kidney. Um because if there's a
lot more of the animal-based material in
the in food, then that's can be more
hard work for the kidney. So it's always
worth checking that those functions are
doing well. But I come back to the point
there is no onesizefits all. We are
omnivores. We're designed to eat almost
anything.
My girlfriend, she's doing keto as well
and she noticed that her menstrual cycle
became more regular.
>> Yes.
>> Which she was like shocked by it. And
she's really done a lot of AB testing
over the the last couple of years. And
whenever she's in a ke ketogenic diet,
very low carb, very low sugar diet for 6
weeks. She was shocked that she could
predict the day when her period would
come. And outside of that, sometimes
it's really
varying.
>> Yeah. Well, there's a very good point
about keto. One of the most effective
things that keto does is it reduces
insulin resistance,
which is something that most of us
suffer as we get older and larger, as we
get through our life. Insulin is the
hormone that packs sugar away into this
into the tissues and into the liver. And
thank God because if we didn't have uh
insulin, we would have diabetes.
um insulin
resistance is growing and that leads to
diabetes increasingly and so diabetes is
in many most parts of the world now is
becoming a another big health issue and
it's mainly because we have too many
carbs too much sugar in the diet because
whenever we eat sugar particularly sugar
there's more work for the insulin to do
so it gets more likely to get run down
and tired when you're on a keto diet
it's been observed that you're you get
more insulin sensitive.
So in other words, insulin works better.
So you can reverse early stages of
diabetes by switching to a keto for
example. Now interestingly many
menstrual problems are linked to insulin
resistance and there's something called
PCOS
which affects quite a lot of women now
uh in which the ovaries basically
produce more hormone producing cysts
polycystic ovary syndrome and that is
increasingly linked with insulin
resistance. So it affects people who are
more likely to be in the pre-diabetic
phase or putting on weight and that sort
of thing.
The insulin resistance itself switches
the hormone balance and the menstrual
cycle is a wonderful
choreography. I mean when you think
about it, you know, all around the world
is a it's a pretty predictable cycle and
it runs itself. But if there's something
insulin resistant getting in the way,
then that can disrupt the hormone. So
someone like your girlfriend might find
that switching to a keto diet abolishes
or reduces that disruptor.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I was just reading some
stats on that said 80% of women with
PCOS have some degree of insulin
resistance, even those who aren't
overweight. And my girlfriend does have
PCOS, which she's talked about publicly
before. So, it's no surprise that uh
that when she comes off, she takes sugar
out of her diet, her menstrual cycle
seems to fall back in line. And I think
there's also links to insulin
resistance, PCOS, and I guess ovulation,
infertility.
>> Yes, it is. So, I think uh I mean the
the modern woman, the modern man for
that matter, has a whole string of
burdens to carry because we have too
much sugar. I mean when you think about
it you know sugar only emerged as a
common ingredient you know 140 years ago
150 years ago up till that time only
very rich people could afford it then we
had the industrial sugar production and
a lot of slaves over in the Americas
producing vast amounts of cane sugar
that is a modern phenomenon and our
bodies were designed to deal with the
amount of sugar that we now feed it and
it does put a stress on the system and
insulin is one of the guys caught in the
mix.
>> So if you're trying to have kids, which
we are now, I guess you want to remove
the uh
>> if that's a factor, I would be looking
at reducing your sugar intake at the
very least. Yeah. I mean, we spend I
spend a lot of time with uh women who
are having difficulty conceiving and you
know, I think I have about 13 herb
babies. you know, in other words, babies
who were born with women who were having
challenges getting pregnant. And that
was mainly, I think, because we were
stabilizing the menstrual cycle and
making the fertile phase a bit more
productive.
>> And what do you what do you say to those
women? You you what do you prescribe? I
guess
>> I do. I mean, that's my business. I will
be prescribing. So, you see there's some
bottles there. uh these are the sort of
things that we use in the practice. Um
so I've given I've got a couple here
that
um just you know the sense the smell
sense. So this is fennel which we all
think we know but these are very strong
extractions that only practitioners use.
So these are practitioner own supplies
and when you smell it you realize that
the that they are strong.
Wow.
>> So, a teaspoon of that is a really
powerful.
Now, if you really want
to
realize the power of herbs,
this is a remedy called echynia. And a
lot of people know about echgonia and
it's a major supplement. This is a root
extraction from a variety of a species
of echania called Angustifolia.
And I'm just going to put a little bit
in there. I'm going to test it myself
before I give it to you. So, I'm not
poisoning you.
So, you just take
a little
Can I put on my skin or put it on?
>> Or did you want me to shop that?
>> Just lick it.
>> Whoa.
Wow.
>> So, these are the sort of things. This
is just a particularly striking example
of the sort of things that we use in the
practice. And so some of the the women
that come to me, for example, with
fertility or menstrual problems will go
out with a mix of herbs drawn like this
from about 100 or so different plants
that I have on the shelves.
And they are often, as I said earlier,
women remedies
developed by women. Um, and
incidentally, North America is is a
prime site for some rarely powerful
women's remedies. Um, and interestingly,
when you look at them, you find they
contain plants equivalent of steroids.
They're not steroids, but they seem to
interact with our own hormone mechanism.
And some of them were particularly good
at retiming
the menstrual cycle. And the the one or
two that were particularly warned women
should not take unless they wish to be
pregnant. So effective were they? What's
that? What's that doing to your
>> still right on the edge of my tongue?
It's like it's it's more so basically
for anyone that can't see what we're
doing cuz you're listening on audio. He
put a little drop of this uh solution
>> echania
>> echania on my finger and I licked it off
my finger and at first I was like there
was this sort of taste journey which was
interesting. I think it kind of tastes
like Maggie seasoning, some kind of food
seasoning. I'm now 60 seconds later and
I can still It's like got more intense.
>> It's a bit like fireworks going off.
>> Yeah, it's like fireworks going off in
my mouth and all it was was a little
lick of it. Um,
>> now you see what we use that for is for
infections or problems of the mouth and
the throat particularly.
>> What what's it doing? Well, you know,
you have to use bit of unscientific
language here, but remember I talked
about the Marines, you know, the guys
who do all the battling for us. A lot of
them hang out. Their barracks are in the
throat. You know, we got tonsils, we got
addenoids, we got the glands that run
down our neck here that sometimes get
swelled up, you know, if we got an
infection in this area. Yeah. You have
to take something to take the
>> It sometimes gets in the way of talking
as well. And I was hesitating before
giving it to you. didn't want to stop
you in your in your steps. But what's
that that tingling
>> cut a as I said a rather confusing story
short those are constituents that almost
seem to talk directly to those white
blood cells and make them more active.
>> And so echynia
in that form particularly
works primarily on the front line shall
we call it of our immune system. these
battlers that sit up there and so often
that's where you want to start the job
and you might have an infection
somewhere else in the body but if you
can work up here with these guys you can
kick off all sorts of benefits and as
you've just discovered it doesn't take
long.
>> No m So who should be thinking about
echynasia?
Certainly if you got an upper
respiratory problem and you you do need
to get that tingle if you want to get
that particular effect. I mean you can
have echgonia in other forms pills and
tablets and so on. Uh and there are some
which don't have that that tingle
factor. They got other elements to it
but for the tingle factor it's anything
to do with an infection that has a link
to what's going on up here. And that
could be for lower down in the gut as
well because all you know our gut begins
up here as well. But it could be a sinus
problem. It could be an middle ear
problem. It could be a throat problem.
It could be a gum problem. You know, we
got all sorts of gum problems and all
sorts of problems we have with mouth.
We've got a microbiome up here as well.
Um, this can with one or two other
things. Some of the plants we use in
this form contain resins.
An example is uh frankincense. We got
some tablets there.
>> These ones.
>> Yeah. otherwise known as Boswelia. And
this just comes in a you know in in the
form of tablets.
And uh
they just look like any other tablets
except they're sort of greeny yellow
color because that's just ground up um
uh resin. Now resin we know about that
because it's the sort of thing you get
on out of pine trees. You know that very
tacky stuff. All we need to do is
remember the Bible story.
There were three gifts that the baby
Jesus got, didn't he, for his birthday
from those wise men. One was gold. Fair
enough. The other two were resins. Myrrh
and frankincense. This is the
frankincense.
I use myrrh in a liquid form. And you
almost like you're lining the mouth with
uh this resin. You know, it's
when you put some myrrh on the mouth,
you definitely feel the the mucos are
firing up. And it was most widely used
um medicine. And the reason why it was
so valued in the in those days by the
three wise men is because my was there
first of all, they had to bring it out
of Africa, you know, which is where he
comes from. Um remember the Queen of
Sheba in who married Solomon you know in
the old uh Bible story Queen of Sheba
had the trade routes of East East Africa
sorted. So Solomon married wisely by
marrying the Queen of Sheba because she
was she had the monopoly on um on myrrh
particularly and on frankincense. And
those an echgonia
maybe with a licorice to help it work
well are amazing at reducing infections
in this area in the mouth and the throat
and the sinuses and the areas around.
It completely blows my mind that most
people will lock their front door before
they leave the house, but they'll sit in
a coffee shop, connect to the public
Wi-Fi, and log into their bank without a
second thought. Every time you go online
in a shop, in an airport, or a hotel,
you're trusting the Wi-Fi is safe. But
often it's not, which makes your online
data vulnerable because all it takes is
one person with the wrong intentions to
steal everything, your passwords, your
private messages, even your identity.
So, let's talk about ExpressVPN, our
sponsor. It stops hackers from stealing
your data by creating a secure privacy
tunnel between all of your devices and
the internet in just one tap. That
tunnel also keeps your online activity
private from other third parties who
might want to get your information. No
one's getting past their encryption. And
this is important to me cuz I'm working
across multiple businesses most of the
time anywhere that I can get a Wi-Fi
connection. And that's why I use
ExpressVPN. And you can secure your
online data today by visiting
expressvpn.com/doac.
That's expressvpn.com/doac
to get up to four extra months free.
Make sure you keep what I'm about to say
to yourself. I'm inviting 10,000 of you
to come even deeper into the diary of a
CEO. Welcome to my inner circle. This is
a brand new private community that I'm
launching to the world. We have so many
incredible things that happen that you
are never shown. We have the briefs that
are on my iPad when I'm recording the
conversation. We have clips we've never
released. We have behindthe-scenes
conversations with the guests and also
the episodes that we've never ever
released. And so much more. In the
circle, you'll have direct access to me.
You can tell us what you want this show
to be, who you want us to interview, and
the types of conversations you would
love us to have. But remember, for now,
we're only inviting the first 10,000
people that join before it closes. So,
if you want to join our private closed
community, head to the link in the
description below or go to
daccircle.com.
I will speak to you then.
Do you do you think that um things like
water fasts, people are doing a lot of
these sort of water fasts and these sort
of 7-day prolonged fasts are effective
medicines?
>> Uh my usual answer when I'm faced with a
question and and someone needed to
answer from is to think back a bit. What
did humans evolve to do? And when we
were hunter gatherers, which you know
was 3 or 400,000 years, we were hunter
gatherers. And now what we're doing now
is a tiny. But we evolved to eat
intermittently.
You know, when you're a hunter gatherer,
there are times when you're not eating
at all, especially offseason, and you
get very hungry and then you eat a lot
and you have a big feast. So I think our
systems were designed to be intermittent
fasting and fasting is probably part of
our gene makeup. You know that's what we
were in a sense meant to do. So the
fundamental principle of fasting is
probably right on.
issue is is that sometimes if your
metabolism, your digestion, your
hormones or other functions are not at
prime place, fasting, particularly if
it's extended, can actually be damaging.
So, you do need a bit of advice if
you're going down that route just to
make sure it's okay for you.
>> And at the start of the conversation,
you referenced that you deal with a lot
of cancer patients. So I think you said
one/3
>> about a third of my a quarter maybe a
quarter to a third yeah are living with
cancer
>> living with cancer
>> which is something that's relatively new
remember because I mean that is a
testament to what modern medicine has
done because when I started out all
those decades ago most people died with
cancer were increasingly getting people
living with cancer for extended periods
of time and
you know the cancer is not I mean we
there are things we can do to help and
there is evidence to show that we can
help reduce the risk at least and if not
sometimes the um virilence of cancer but
mostly what we're doing is helping
people to function better while they've
been through chemo or various other
treatments while they've still
recovering from the cancer and its
effects and it could be digestion could
be things like sleep it could be you
know all sorts of other things that we
can do to help. So there's there's the
preventative element which is doing
things within your sort of lifestyle
choices, your diet to reduce the the
likelihood you'll get cancer. But then
once you have it, there's ways you can
use herbs and other sort of remedies to
better deal with
>> life
>> life generally. When you when you think
about cancer prevention, is it do you
think that one of the most powerful
things we can do is to focus on what
we're putting inside our bodies?
>> Yes. And you know, we've learned about
cigarettes a long time ago. And there
are other foods that have got a higher
risk of cancer. We talk about, you know,
processed meats for example has
increasingly been seen as a cancer risk.
U but I suggest that the main risk in
cancer is just poor diets generally. Too
much fat, too much carbs, too much sugar
all at once usually. Um and that strains
the body in a way it wasn't meant. And
there is evidence to show that by
correcting poor diet you can prevent um
cancer increasingly that's accepted.
>> I'm pretty sure that the cardiovascular
diseases are the single biggest killer.
Yes. Still
>> cardiovascular in the west we're talking
about so developed countries
>> catching up I'm afraid in other parts of
the world where they adopt more western
lifestyles. Uh but that's a combination
of food and poor low level of exercise.
um that we're putting our finger on
there is also cardiovascular disease is
a is another form of long-term
inflammation and increasingly that's
been understood. You know, it's not just
fat or cholesterol or blood pressure.
It's an inflammatory mechanism going on
that's causing the harm and that's
increasingly accepted by cardiologists
and such. So, if I'm if I'm trying to
reduce my chances of having some kind of
heart related issue, are there any herbs
or any products here that you think are
beneficial?
>> Mostly, it's the food. When we're
talking about long-term cardiovascular
health, uh we have plants that we use uh
to manage
cardiac cardiovascular problems. I mean
the classic that a lot of people know
about is the Hawthorne or the Mayflower.
Uh but the Hawthorne particularly the
flour and the leaf used to be a regular
home remedy that people used to use and
drink as a tea uh for all sorts of
reasons. You know managing fevers and
all sorts of things like that. But we
can we can now see regular hawthornne
consumption, hawthornne leaf consumption
as a preventative for some of the
problems of cardiovascular. Just as an
example, I would I would use spices as
my main go-to to help to fend off
cardiovascular problems because they all
have vascular benefits.
>> Spices as in as in
>> the ginger, the cinnamon we talked
about, but here's turmeric. And this is
something we don't usually see in but if
you can see there's in fact if you cut
that with your knife there
>> I've just cut it open.
>> Yeah. You'll see it's bright. Yeah. It's
bright orange. That's the kurcumin
that people use as a supplement.
>> I've got kurcumin at home. I was um I
was advised to use that when I pulled
the ligaments in my ankle.
>> Yes.
>> It's an anti-inflammatory, isn't it?
You can see a little bit why I don't
like using anti-inflammatory because I
like inflammation as a friend. So what I
prefer to talk about is they modulate or
support or manage inflammation. Uh but
turmeric is an extraordinary remedy and
here's an interesting story. We talk
about we need kurcumin that from
turmeric and you'll get a supplement
saying you know my co my turmeric's got
more kurcumin than yours and it's more
available. The the interesting point is
that kurcumin is not absorbed by into
the body at all about one or two% maybe
the rest stays stubbornly in the gut
and there's a very good reason for that
because in any high dose kuramin is
toxic.
So there's a good reason for it staying
in the gut, but there's a lot of work on
making it more bioavailable, getting the
levels up in the blood. And if you add
pepper, you might get from 1 or 2% to 2
to 3%, you know, but it's still small
beer compared with the amount of
turmeric that we uh take uh the amounts
of kurcumin that we take in in an
ordinary curry. So what's going on? And
that what is going on is that kurcamin
and in and turmeric is one of the best
remedies we have for microbiome.
There's a conversation going on. The
turmeric is encouraging the good guys.
The good guys are breaking turmeric and
kurcumin down into more available
materials which are active.
it belongs in the gut and its
inflammatory modulating effects come
mostly from the products of the
microbiome working on the kurcumin and
moving through the body that way. So
it's a wonderful lesson in you know the
that the medicine actually relies in
this case almost entirely on a good
microbiome.
an effect that is reduced by the way if
you have a lot of antibiotics.
>> Okay, so my microbiome is really the
processing center for many of these
things. And if I have a bad gut
microbiome because I've been eating the
wrong foods and I haven't had diversity
of plants, then even if I take some of
these herbs that are good for me, I
won't be able to process them properly
anyway.
>> Not as well as you might. Yes, that is
true. We talk about uh we the the the we
got probiotics which is the yogurts and
the kimchi and the cafiers and so on
which are actually living organisms.
They have to get through the stomach by
the way which is quite a hard deal
because the stomach's job is to
sterilize foods but some of them will
get through. Those are the probiotics.
The prebiotics are what we've been
talking about here. The foods that will
encourage the good guys in the
microbiome. We got a new kit on the
block called postbiotics.
>> Mhm.
>> Which is now an industrial term used for
killed bacteria which are then given as
a medicine. But technically a postbiotic
is anything that the bacteria produce.
>> Mhm.
>> And we're learning that more and more of
what we eat, particularly from the plant
side, is converted by the microbiome
into medicines.
And all those polyphenols and the
colorings and so on are in that group.
So a lot of the benefits of polyphenols
are postbiotic benefits.
>> There was a study done in 2007 that
showed can't even say it.
>> Curcumin
>> that shows curcumin upregulates anti-
oxidant defenses and downregulates
oxidative stress.
>> Yeah. There was a study done in 2016
which is a meta analysis of random
control trials found curcuminum
comparable to ibuprofen in terms of pain
relief.
>> Answers your earlier question, doesn't
it?
>> And there's a lot of uh lots of studies
that show that it's effective for people
that have things like arthritis
and joint pains.
>> Yeah, that was leaving the best to last.
Yeah, there there's a lot of work on
kurcamin and turmeric. As I say, a lot
of people get confused because they
think the it only works if you absorb it
into the blood. And I'm saying that
actually you don't. What you do is you
work with the microbiome to make it
useful.
>> And there's early preclinical studies
taking place around the impact it can
have with cancers. And there's promising
but early studies showing the impact
that curcumin that comes from turmeric
can have on brain health.
>> Yes. Well, that's definitely a big
story, but just on the when you say
preclinical, that usually mean that it
does mean laboratory. So that's a test
tubes and b rats and other animals.
>> None of those tell us what happens when
we
>> put it in a human.
>> Put it in the human. So all a
preclinical study will do is point to a
possible effect. And time again,
pharmaceutical companies will tell you
this. you know, a promising pre-clinical
lead doesn't lead to a medicine because
it turns out to be a toxic or doesn't
agree with humans. So, we take
pre-clinical evidence with caution. And
we're personally I'm mostly interested
in human studies because that's the only
thing that makes any sense. Um, but you
mentioned brain health because here's
one of the big gaps we have, don't we?
Because we were we've got a lot of brain
health issues right now.
>> Mhm. dementia is still going in the
wrong direction. Um it's a very
distressing thing if you have any in
your family and increasingly there's
people saying what can we do to prevent
this and Alzheimer's is all about there
being the wrong sort of protein and
deposits in the brain but increasingly
the focus is switching on to the blood
supply to the brain what we call the
vascular effects on the brain and
there's something we used to call the
blood brain barrier which you probably
heard of which is seen to be the place
where the barrier that stops a lot of
stuff entering the brain and potentially
upsetting it. We now know this bloodb
brain barrier is a very dynamic
interesting interface between the brains
tissue and the rest of us. is now called
the neurovvascular unit, NVU.
And it is so exciting. And the more we
look at it so far, the more we find that
the things that help the neurovvascular
unit, the bloodb brain barrier are
plants. And we have green tea. And you
know we can if you if you really want to
help um our brain health regular
drinking of green tea you know
it's been shown to be really useful. Not
that rather than the supplement by the
way is the drink that you have um oh I
put it in here right so we can make it.
So as you make that can you explain to
me why green tea is a good idea
>> because it contains a number of again
polyphenols
>> and polyphenols are those
>> are these colors
>> these colors yeah
>> in this case it's green obviously and me
tea is just the smoked unprocessed part
of the tea leaf so it's a plant called
chameleia senses um
so this is a nice Japanese teapot.
That's the sort of thing you'd have
green tea in. And these are the mugs,
but we've filled these up already with
uh uh ginger and cinnamon. So, let's
let's leave it for a moment. But what we
can while it's sitting there for a
while, there are a number of these
polyphenols and green tea that seem to
be particularly
effective in modulating that barrier. We
talked about the neurovvascular unit
between the brain and the rest of us.
And um there's all sorts of reasons why
regular consumption of green tea seems
to be linked to less of this sort of
trouble.
>> What what sort of trouble?
>> The dementia type problems, cognitive
decline as you get older.
>> Do they find that in cultures where they
drink a lot of green tea, they have less
dementia?
>> Yeah. But that doesn't mean there's a
cause and effect. So you need a few
other things to establish that. What
we're finding is that other plants have
very likely powerful effects in this
area. And I mentioned the rosemary. Now
all you need to do to appreciate
rosemary is to press it and sniff.
>> Oh, it smells so good. Really nice.
>> That's not just nice because what you're
doing there is you're inhaling volatile
oils,
>> the things that give the smell.
>> And when you're inhaling,
they're literally going into your brain
because part of the brain actually
reaches the outside world. It's called
the alactory lobe and it's right at the
top of the nose here.
>> And when you inhale something, it
literally moves into the brain and from
there into the lyic system. Remember
there's a line in a Shakespeare play
called Hamlet Ailia
the young lady says rosemary that's for
remembrance
>> because everyone knew that this improved
cognitive functions and when I was in
working on our campus in Maryland we
actually did a clinical trial with
rosemary in people with struggling with
their crosswords you know as they get
older and found that although it wasn't
a conclusive study there were pointers
to it improving cognitive or performance
in those people and there's been other
studies since that re that reinforce
that. I would say that rosemary is one
of the ones to watch in terms of
long-term brain health. There's another
remedy called GKO that a lot of people
know about which is used as a
prescription medicine in Europe uh for
cardiovascular problems and that's been
shown to be likely useful and using the
same sort of mechanisms as as we've seen
here and with the green tea. I'll check
it here. Yeah, that looks all right.
You see it's more yellow than green, but
uh
and this is flavored with a little bit
of mint to make it a little more
agreeable. Sometimes people find green
tea is not their favorite taste.
>> Green tea is rich in polyphenols um
which are linked to benefits ranging
from heart and brain health to fat loss
and cancer prevention.
>> It's got a nice minty flavor.
>> Yeah.
>> You could live with that, couldn't you?
>> Yeah. Yeah,
>> my girlfriend again, she she's all over
this stuff. She's always bloody right.
>> Well, you know that or learned that
lesson a long time ago.
>> I know, right? Like I say it all the
time on this podcast, but she's always
like two, three years ahead of what then
someone really really smart comes and
tells me and I spend those two or three
years in denial. I'm like, what the [__]
is she like doing over there? Don't get
me started on cacao. If you start
talking to me about cacao, I'm going to
leave. No, no, no, no, no. She's been
telling
>> I'm gonna I'm gonna nail this because
there's a lot of people listening who
will want to hear this. Okay,
>> Coco. Yeah,
>> chocolate, dark chocolate is a medicine.
End of one of the best medicines around
is 50 g or 100 g of 75% or more dark
chocolate. Do you know what I've just
realized? My girlfriend, she's going to
live till she's 150 because she all she
eats 90% or something 80% dark
chocolate. She drinks green tea all day.
She has
the ginger and cinnamon drinks all day.
She eats the full rainbow.
>> She should be slipping in for you.
>> I know. I I know. Exactly.
>> No, Coco. Seriously,
brain health as well,
>> cardiovascular health.
>> I mean, they just they do studies where
they've put coco into volunteers. That
means students usually um you know so
young kids and they were able to show
changes in the blood flow within minutes
certainly within an hour of eating cocoa
>> beneficial changes in your blood flow.
>> They call it the heart medicine.
>> Yeah. Heart circulation brain.
>> So she's um my girlfriend's very
spiritual. She runs a business called
Barley Breathwork. Um hashtag ad if I
have to say that. But in her business,
one of the things she does at the very
start of the session with women all over
the world that come to her retreats is
she makes cacao for them. And
you notice instantly how people change
when they've had a hot cup of cacao.
It's and and she says it like almost
brings out their heart. And I guess
that's because of the circulation
reasons. It is, but it also of course we
know it contains a few other beneficial
stimul stimulating effects sort of
similar to the effects with coffee which
in certainly as I've already said is a
medicine as well. Uh but cocoa and
chocolate does have a uplifting effect
which is why we love it. So
>> and we have to be clear here we're not
talking about hot chocolate that comes
from a packet or something necessarily.
>> We would like it to be as dark as
possible.
>> Okay. So,
>> the less sugar, the less fat. Um, so we
talk about 75% cocoa solids, you know,
so it's dark chocolate and it tastes a
bit more medicinal, doesn't it? It's not
as sweet. Um, but I'm saying to many of
my patients, take 50 grams a day.
It's a medicine.
>> Damn, she's right. My fridge is full of
dark chocolate. I tend to avoid it, but
the drawer of my fridge has all of her
dark chocolate in and it's she she likes
it 90%. If she can get it 90%, she'll
take it.
>> Yeah. 90% is quite bitter now.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> I am I was in Peru and I went to a
chocolate making lesson and that
chocolate making lesson changed my life.
And it changed my life because I didn't
realize how much sugar goes into
chocolate, but specifically white
chocolate. Oh my god. They said they
gave me this big beaker which was you
know this big like a a foot high and a
foot wide and they were like right pour
the sugar in. So I poured some and
they're like they like laughed at me.
They were like no fill it like 70% with
this white sugar. And I was like there's
no way. I poured about 60 or 70%
white sugar into this massive tube and
they were like okay now put a little bit
of this and a little bit of this little
bit of oil whatever. And I couldn't
believe that it's literally like the
white chocolate is like literally all
sugar. Then milk chocolate was like 50%
sugar. And then when we did when we made
the dark chocolate, it was a tiny amount
like a tiny tiny amount. And from that
day onwards, white chocolate's left my
life. There was once upon a time we a
few years back when the Europeans uh
union, I think before we joined it, said
that we shouldn't call uh dairy milk
chocolate at all. It's a chocolate
flavor candy is what they described it
as
>> literally. Yeah. So this is So we've got
some green tea here.
>> Yeah.
>> And you're talking to me about the
association between green tea and
Alzheimer's which is really exciting.
>> Yes.
>> Um
>> there's quite a lot of work being done
now on these
and there they're obviously looking for
medications as well but so far most of
the data coming in in relates to
plant-based materials. So it suggests
that there's other reasons why having
plants and again spices come back into
the mix um seem to be helpful for brain
health. I'm having a look at the green
tea.
There was a study done in 2008 which
supports how it improved cognitive
function, memory, attention accuracy and
um long-term consumption associated with
lower risk of cognitive decline and
Alzheimer's disease according to the
Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry in
2011.
>> It's nice to have somebody else just say
what you said.
>> Yeah, but it's it's exactly I didn't
realize. I didn't I had no idea.
I had no idea.
All those times I turned it down when
she offered it to me.
>> You can't say sorry.
>> I have literally literally I've got a
Wow. heart health, brain function, fat
burning and metabolism, cancer
prevention, early evidence, blood sugar
and insulin sensitivity, gut and oral
health. What about matcha? I'm a I'm a
big investor in um the biggest matcha
company in Europe. It's probably more
beneficial than the basic green tea
because it's it's it's more shall we say
pure. Um it's finer quality. So the
chances are that matcha will do more
than we've just said the green tea will
do. Um but there's there's a evidence
lack and a lot of these things is we
need more evidence, but it would point
to matcha being particularly helpful.
>> We haven't talked much about
cholesterol.
No, you haven't brought it up.
>> Cholesterol is a type of fat made in
your liver which travels in your blood
and can be found. What is um for anyone
that doesn't know cholesterol, what it
is and why it if it's a good or bad
thing,
>> what do I need to know about cholesterol
and is there anything in front of us
here that can help keep my cholesterol
in a healthy state? I did think I think
a doctor did actually tell me at one
point that I had high cholesterol
>> um a couple of years ago because of my
diet at the time. The keto of course
will tend to well it's interesting again
keto you think would push up your
cholesterol levels but actually there's
a mixture of effects. So it's not it's
not a done deal that it will raise your
cholesterol. It there's cholesterol is
part of a range of fats the body has.
Most of the fats that are in the body
come from the food and they come in as
heavy fats we say. And what the
digestion does is a strip down the
heaviness and it becomes more what we
call high density
uh lipop liposite
HDLs. My tongue is twisting around it.
And uh cholesterol is sort of in the
middle of that as one of the elements
within that spectrum of fats.
What cholesterol is actually a secreted
by the liver for very good reasons. It
helps with all sorts of things. It's the
basis of some of our hormones. There's
all sorts of reasons why we need
cholesterol. I sometimes have referred
to in the past as the tiger in the tank
that it sort of helps to fire up some of
our get up and go. And if we were
physically active during the during the
day working on the land or whatever, you
need a certain amount of cholesterol to
motor.
We're sitting in chairs and the
cholesterol becomes increasing a
problem. We have a highfat diet that
tends to put in more of it. And the
point is that many of us our cholesterol
levels increasingly rise and that is a
risk factor as we know for
cardiovascular disease. we we said was
still one of the biggest killer. So
cholesterol is up there as a risk factor
and so the usual thing that a doctor
will do is to hand you something a
statin basically that will reduce your
cholesterol levels.
They also know that there's more push
back on that prescription than almost
anything else because the word is out
that statins can do this that or the
other interfere with your muscle
strength and all the rest of it. Give
you little aches and pains that you know
most people have statins without a
problem but the
impact of statins is still modest in
terms of the overall scheme of things.
You know the numbers of people's lives
it saves is probably fairly minimal. So
the probably the better conversation is
to have what can we do to
recontextualize the cholesterol so that
it becomes more like it should be a good
thing rather than a risk and the first
thing is to have a more apart from the
keto have the more vegetable-based
plant-based diet because that in itself
will tend to mop up and reduce
cholesterol.
exercise becomes important because by
physical activity we can manage it
better. And then where we come in uh
with the work I do is to look at high
cholesterol is potentially a sign of
liver distress and you know we like
working with the liver and there's a
number of remedies that we use to help
reduce cholesterol levels mainly by
getting more out through the bile and so
on. So, it's a there's not a straight
answer to your question. Um, you know,
the statin is sounds like a simple pill
that fixes it. Uh, the reality is is
that we need to look at a much wider
range of things.
>> You're a fan of artichokes for
cholesterol.
>> Yes, you you must have read my mind. Uh,
the artich choke leaf uh is the one
we're talking about which is used in
France a lot for basically fat liver
related problems a lot. Uh I use it a
lot in the practice as a juice actually
just as a pressed juice. Um uh yes it's
one of them. Dandelion root is another
old familiar which seems to be helpful
here mostly by as I said flushing stuff
through the bile and there is a range of
other things that we use.
>> One of the things that you know many
people are concerned about when they're
thinking about changing their diet is
just the cost of it. they think it's
super expensive to to buy all these
fresh fruit and veg and you know
is that the case is is that a barrier to
to entry to the stuff we've talked about
today at all
>> my usual answer that is east eat Asian
because as I said if you can make a meal
with vegetables and spices and things
like lentils and so on beans for very
cheaply it's just that we got out of the
habit or we haven't got into the habit
of doing that slightly slow cooking. Uh
we will buy our Indian meals sometimes
from places that put a more fat in than
they might. Um so some of the meals we
can buy that are Asian are a bit too
fatty. But if you make it yourself at
home, which means learning how to cook,
but you can eat very cheaply.
>> What is the most important thing that we
didn't talk about that we should have
talked about?
Well, I suppose I didn't mention much
about the omerazole um because that that
>> I've never heard of this before.
>> Mezriole?
>> Yeah, I've never heard of it.
>> Yeah, they are increasingly a minority.
>> Oh, really? Arazzole is the most widely
prescribed drug in this country and I
believe in the US also. And it's for
acid reflux.
>> It's what the Americans call gird and
what we call gourd because we spell
esophagus differently. So we spell
esophagus with an OE and Americans spell
it with an E. So it's either gird or
gore depending on which country you're
in. And that means gastro esophageal
reflux disease. Gourd.
And acid reflux is a real issue with a
lot of people and they find that when
they go to a doctor, the doctor will
routinely prescribe a merazole or
something like it.
And gourd is actually diagnosed by as a
condition which is made better by
omerazol. I mean it's literally it's a
disease that is diagnosed by the
treatment.
And what a merazole does is shuts down
the acid production in the stomach. So
you don't get as much damage by reflux.
The problem is is that the acid's doing
a job. It's sterilizing your food, which
is important, isn't it? It's also
helping to break it down so that it
becomes not an immune threat, which you
know, if you have a blood transfusion or
something in the wrong blood, you get a
problem. You we're eating forest stuff
all the time. We rely on the stomach and
the juices to make it safe. So, the acid
is there to protect us.
When we're getting acid reflux,
actually, it's not because you got too
much acid. is because you're refluxing
it. It's going back up into the gullet,
the esophagus. But a merazole will put
an end to that. The problem with a two
problems. First is that the list of
problems occurring from long-term
amrazol use is beginning to grow and is
serious.
Cancers, dementias, all sorts of things
are beginning to be downstream problems
associated with long-term omerazol use.
But the other thing is is that once
you're on it, it's really difficult to
come off it and you get a famous rebound
effect. So you come off the merazole and
wow, you get much more trouble. So the
only thing to do is take more mezrazole
and people find it really hard to come
off it. So you have to do a lot of hard
work to wean people off and do it in
sorts of different ways. So what do we
do instead? Well, one simple thing to
do, and anyone can do this, and you
don't need to go very far, is to use
what we call the raft principle. So,
there are some plants that have got a
lot of mucus in them, mucelage.
The classic example from North America,
Sri Elm, it's a sort of powder that
looks like you make polyfiller to fill
the crack with, you know, it's a white
powder. When it's mixed with water, it
forms this paste, this muc mucous stuff.
You want to have it as a tablet because
you don't want all to swallow that
stuff. But when it's in the stomach, it
produces this mucus layer. You don't
need to go to slippery elm. There is a
product here in this country called
Gavaskon, which is essentially seaweed
gum with I don't have shares in it, by
the way, but it it's seaweed gum with
some minerals in there. And they
advertise it when you see the television
ads as the raft. So what they're doing
is you're putting a layer of mucus on
top of your food. So you have it after
you've had your last mouthful. You have
a bit of there. And then as the food
pushes up back into the gullet, you've
got this nice mucous coating, a raft to
stop it
>> back up.
That carbohydrate, it's what it is, gets
digested within a couple of hours. End
off. No problem. It's not even a
medicine. It's just a physical barrier.
So it could have gavasone, you could
have copium, you could have aloe vera,
there's a number of other muc mucousy
type plants that people use and that can
without any other complication at all be
one step. And I use it regularly with
with when I'm weaning people off. I will
use the raft principle to help prevent
some of the harm you get with reflux.
That's simple example.
You're very fond of these plants. They
are living organisms, aren't they?
Are you concerned about how we we treat
them?
>> I'm concerned about the nate the world
that they come from because of course
increasingly we have to produce these
industrially which sometimes mean in
monoculture. Well, it usually means a
monoulture form. They're grown in rows
and rows and they put weed killers down
to get other plants out of the way and
so they become less
uh natural.
>> And we talked about the polyphenols. You
know, PA, the company I worked for was
all organic and we were able to show
that a plant that grows organically
that doesn't have pesticides
needs to fight his own battles more.
>> Mhm. Because if you got a pesticide, you
don't need to worry about so much, you
know, the the pests and the attackers.
So, a plant that's grown in wild or
organically without chemicals has more
polyphenols because the polyphenols are
part of the plant's defense mechanism. M
>> so the more you can buy or I mean that's
where foraging comes in. You know my
colleague in Devon is a forager and he
he can walk around hedro and show you
you can make a whole meal out of plasma
people just walk past um because people
used to do that. So that's real wild
eating which must be one of the best
ways of eating. Uh but the more close to
nature you can get your plants the
better. We have to live with what we've
got and most plants are grown without
that. But they're still better than
having them not having them at all.
Simon, thank you. Um, we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest not knowing who they're leaving it
for. The question left for you is, "Our
world is changing fast. How do you keep
up?"
I think
the world is we all know getting pretty
scary out there, isn't it?
There is a a truth which is you and the
people around you are the actually the
only things that matter daytoday are
they are of closest dearest the ones
that we have invested most.
One of the reasons that I'm increasingly
happy to spend my time working in the
practice in extra rather than
chasing around the world is because
as
the world gets more frightening,
the more you realize that it's the
connections you make with each other
you put back to back if you like, you
know, face the world out there back to
back. And I think
it's reconnecting with those who are
closest to you. That is the best
antidote I know. And that also includes
reconnecting with the the nature and the
world around it. So that would be my
answer.
>> And who is that in your life? Who are
those people?
>> I have family. I have now 10
grandchildren between us, Rachel and
myself.
>> Congratulations. And so um the uh
electronic calendar comes into its own
to keep track of all that. Uh so yes the
we've we've uh got a a no spread around
the globe. So it's a it's a widespread
thing but we've got people close by and
you know obviously your closest and
nearest are the ones that matter.
>> Simon thank you so much for doing what
you do. I highly recommend everybody
goes and checks out your work. I've
never had a conversation with someone
that knows so much about plants and and
herbs in my life. So, I was so excited
to learn more. And you have changed my
opinion on so many things. I can't wait
to go and tell my girlfriend that she's
right about everything.
>> I'll I'll slip her the I'll she can slip
me the tenner.
>> And I highly recommend um people go and
check out your your website and go to
your herb which takes place once a
month. Um, I'm sure there's going to be
lots of people getting in touch with you
to try and come and see you in person as
well, which is fantastic. Is there
anything else that if my listeners want
to take a step forward from here in this
direction and understand more about
herbs? I've got your books here which
I'm going to link below. There's the
herb hour on your website. Is there
anything else that we should be aware
of?
>> As I said, the website does link to this
wonderful resource that's not I mean I
contribute to the herbal reality one
which is where you're going to find
almost anything you want to know about
using plants. So that's I'll stop there,
but you can step through my website to
get there because you'll find a few
other things on the way. Um there is
resources out there and it's
increasingly reliable. These are not
dreamt up, you know, for a Tik Tok
video. They're well thought through and
based on a lot of human experience. So
there is stuff out there if you're
looking for it.
>> Thank you. You're very much leading the
charge to bring us all back to being
human beings and I'm a big big fan of
that and it's a journey I'm on myself.
So, thank you so much for doing the work
that you do and being a champion for for
nature in all its forms. So, um and I
really really hope that uh I really hope
that more people, more podcasters host
you so that you can get the uh get the
message out there.
>> Thank you.
>> This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor?
If you like the show and you like what
we do here and you want to support us,
the free simple way that you can do just
that is by hitting the subscribe button.
And my commitment to you is if you do
that, then I'll do everything in my
power, me and my team, to make sure that
this show is better for you every single
week. We'll listen to your feedback.
We'll find the guests that you want me
to speak to, and we'll continue to do
what we do. Thank you so much.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.